I read 3_SURDS_AGN_V10_Full_Range.ipynb.
Because it is a single notebook with 173 cells, the most useful interpretation of “for each one” is for each major section/workflow block rather than every individual cell. The notebook is substantial and has a clear structure: data ingestion, preprocessing, initial SURD analysis, velocity-resolved extension, synthetic-data demonstration, robustness testing, null tests, ICCF comparison, and data validation/presentation export.
Here is a detailed review section by section.

Overall assessment
This is a strong research notebook. It shows real scientific development rather than a toy example. It combines:
	•	real AGN light curves,
	•	velocity-resolved H(\beta) construction from spectra,
	•	SURD lag scans,
	•	synthetic validation,
	•	robustness checks,
	•	null tests,
	•	and comparison with a classical reverberation tool.
That is a serious workflow and scientifically promising.
At the same time, the notebook still has the character of an active research lab notebook, not yet a polished reproducible analysis pipeline. Its biggest weaknesses are:
	•	heavy dependence on hard-coded local paths,
	•	duplicated code and repeated analysis blocks,
	•	inconsistent notebook narrative in later sections,
	•	lack of a single master configuration section,
	•	and too much state dependence between cells.
So scientifically it is good, but computationally it needs refactoring.

1. Title and project framing
What it does
The notebook opens with the title:
“Revealing Causal Structure in AGN Reverberation Mapping with Information Decomposition (SURD)”
This immediately states the scientific purpose clearly: apply SURD to AGN reverberation mapping and interpret causal structure beyond standard lag methods.
Analysis
This is a good title because it connects the notebook to a genuine astrophysical problem: in AGN reverberation studies, multiple observed bands may be redundant, uniquely informative, or jointly informative about the broad-line response. The notebook’s framing is aligned with that scientific need.
Comment for improvement
The framing would become stronger if the notebook added, right at the top, a short “study goals” block with explicit hypotheses such as:
	1	continuum (\to) integrated H(\beta),
	2	continuum + blue wing (\to) core H(\beta),
	3	continuum + wing combinations (\to) velocity-resolved response,
	4	robustness to cadence/binning/null tests.
That would make the notebook easier for another researcher to follow.

2. Step 1–2: file access, extraction, folder inspection
What it does
The early cells mount/access files, inspect a directory tree, and establish where the AGN data live.
Analysis
This is practical and necessary in exploratory work. It helps verify file availability before analysis starts.
But these cells reveal one of the notebook’s biggest structural issues: paths such as
/Users/ayan/Programs/SURD/agn_surd_project/
are hard-coded throughout the notebook.
That means the notebook is currently tied to one machine and one directory layout.
Comment for improvement
This section should be redesigned into a single configuration cell, for example:
PROJECT_ROOT = Path(...)
DATA_DIR = PROJECT_ROOT / "agn_data"
PLOTS_DIR = PROJECT_ROOT / "plots"
SURD_UTILS_PATH = PROJECT_ROOT / "external" / "SURD" / "utils"
Then every later cell should use those variables.
This one change would dramatically improve reproducibility.

3. Step 3: loading the main continuum and H(\beta) CSV files
What it does
The notebook loads cleaned NGC 5548 continuum and integrated H(\beta) data into pandas DataFrames.
Analysis
This is the correct starting point for real reverberation work. The notebook makes a reasonable separation between continuum and line data and uses DataFrames, which is appropriate.
The code also includes basic error handling with try/except, which is good.
Scientific value
This section sets up the first physically meaningful analysis: can continuum and integrated H(\beta) be related through SURD lag scans?
Comment for improvement
This section should include an explicit schema validation step:
	•	required columns,
	•	missing-value counts,
	•	monotonicity of time,
	•	duplicated timestamps,
	•	units of flux and errors.
Right now the notebook assumes too much about input cleanliness.
A short validation report printed after loading would make the rest of the notebook much more trustworthy.

4. Step 4: diagnostic plots for the light curves
What it does
The notebook plots the continuum and H(\beta) light curves with uncertainties.
Analysis
This is an important sanity check. In time-domain astronomy, you should always inspect the raw light curves before resampling or standardizing them.
This step is simple but scientifically important because it lets you see:
	•	irregular cadence,
	•	long-term trends,
	•	noise level,
	•	outliers,
	•	observational gaps.
Comment for improvement
The plots would be more informative if they also included:
	•	vertical markers for large seasonal gaps,
	•	median cadence annotation,
	•	signal-to-noise summary,
	•	and perhaps normalized versions on the same panel.
A dual-panel figure showing raw flux and z-scored flux would better prepare the reader for the later SURD input construction.

5. Step 5: preparing NGC 5548 data for SURD analysis
What it does
This section defines helper functions such as:
	•	zscore
	•	resample_to_uniform_grid
	•	time-series preparation utilities
and creates a uniform-grid standardized dataset for SURD.
Analysis
This is one of the notebook’s most important technical sections.
SURD in this implementation relies on synchronized arrays, so irregular astronomical sampling must be transformed into a common grid. The notebook handles this by resampling and z-scoring, which is a reasonable first approach.
The preprocessing logic is one of the strengths of the notebook. It is explicit and understandable.
Scientific significance
This section is where astrophysical data become computational objects suitable for information decomposition.
Weakness
The scientific validity of the later results depends strongly on the assumptions made here:
	•	interpolation method,
	•	choice of dt,
	•	treatment of missing intervals,
	•	standardization after interpolation,
	•	whether interpolation injects artificial smoothness.
Comment for improvement
This section should be documented much more carefully. In particular, I would recommend adding:
	•	the interpolation method explicitly in markdown,
	•	a comparison of linear vs nearest vs spline interpolation,
	•	a mask showing where real data exist versus interpolated regions,
	•	and a measure of interpolation fraction as a function of time.
That would make the SURD results easier to trust physically.

6. Step 6: real SURD lag scan for NGC 5548
What it does
This section imports SURD utilities from the local repository and runs lag scans on the prepared data.
Analysis
This is the core scientific engine of the notebook.
The lag-scan setup is appropriate: it evaluates information decomposition as a function of lag rather than assuming a single fixed delay. This is exactly the right thing to do in reverberation problems.
The section is conceptually strong.
Strengths
	•	Uses actual SURD utilities rather than only descriptive discussion.
	•	Connects predictor/target structure to lag.
	•	Bridges astronomy with multivariate information decomposition.
Weaknesses
The section is too dependent on notebook state and local imports. It is not yet robust as a standalone execution unit.
Also, there is not enough local explanation of:
	•	what lag_scan_target3 returns,
	•	what each metric means physically,
	•	how normalization is handled,
	•	whether leakage is normalized or raw.
Comment for improvement
This section should be turned into a reusable function with explicit signature, for example:
run_real_surd_scan(X, lags, nbins, target_index, predictor_labels)
It should return a structured DataFrame and not just plots or ad hoc variables in memory.
That would make the later robustness sections much cleaner.

7. Step 7: dominant lag estimation and summarization
What it does
This section interprets lag-scan results, identifies dominant peaks, and summarizes the findings.
Analysis
This is a necessary interpretive section. The notebook is not just running code; it is trying to extract astrophysical conclusions.
That is good scientific practice.
Weakness
Peak picking can be unstable, especially in noisy, interpolated, or multi-peaked lag scans. The notebook appears to identify maxima, but I would want stronger criteria:
	•	peak prominence,
	•	uncertainty bands,
	•	bootstrap stability,
	•	comparison with shuffled/null distributions.
Comment for improvement
This section should report not just “the peak lag” but:
	•	top 3 peaks,
	•	prominence,
	•	width,
	•	and stability under resampling.
A single peak value can give a false sense of precision.

8. Note on duplicated continuum SURD run
What it does
The notebook explicitly notes a duplicated run.
Analysis
This is actually a good sign scientifically: the author noticed and documented a duplication issue instead of silently ignoring it.
Comment for improvement
But the existence of such a note also shows the notebook has become too stateful and manually edited. Duplications are a symptom of notebook drift.
A better structure would be:
	•	one function,
	•	one parameter block,
	•	one loop over targets,
	•	one summary table.
That would remove the need for explanatory notes about duplicate runs.

9. Step 8: process velocity-resolved H(\beta) profiles
This is the most ambitious and interesting part of the notebook.
What it does
This whole block:
	•	extracts .tar.gz spectral files,
	•	inspects one .spc file,
	•	defines a parser,
	•	converts wavelength to velocity,
	•	chooses H(\beta) velocity bins,
	•	processes all spectra into velocity-binned light curves,
	•	saves the resulting DataFrame,
	•	and visualizes the output.
Analysis
This is excellent in scientific scope. It upgrades the project from integrated-line reverberation to velocity-resolved reverberation, which is much closer to real BLR structure studies.
This is probably the most valuable part of the notebook.
Step 8.1: inspect a single .spc file
Good exploratory step. It helps verify the file format before bulk parsing.
Step 8.2: parser function
Important and necessary. Turning spectroscopy files into structured arrays is the correct move.
Step 8.3: diagnostic spectrum plot
Very useful. This verifies that parsing succeeded and that the H(\beta) profile is physically reasonable.
Step 8.4: define H(\beta) parameters and wavelength-to-velocity conversion
Scientifically important. The conversion into velocity space is essential for BLR interpretation.
Step 8.5: define velocity bins
This is the conceptual heart of the velocity-resolved workflow.
Step 8.6: process all profiles into velocity-binned light curves
This is the main data-engineering achievement of the notebook.
Step 8.7–8.9: save, plot, and summarize
Good practice. Saving processed products is important.
Strengths
	•	Moves from raw spectroscopy to time-domain kinematic diagnostics.
	•	Enables blue/core/red wing analysis.
	•	Makes later SURD analysis physically meaningful.
Weaknesses
This whole block likely has the highest hidden-risk level in the notebook. Potential issues include:
	•	uncertain filename-to-MJD conversion,
	•	continuum subtraction assumptions,
	•	flux integration over bins without error propagation,
	•	sensitivity to bin edges,
	•	lack of formal spectral calibration checks.
Comment for improvement
This section deserves a dedicated validation sub-notebook or module.
At minimum, I would add:
	•	verification of wavelength calibration,
	•	rest-frame correction test,
	•	continuum-window check,
	•	error propagation into velocity-bin fluxes,
	•	and sensitivity to different bin definitions.
Right now the section is promising, but the astrophysical reliability depends on assumptions that should be stress-tested more explicitly.

10. Step 9: identify matching continuum for velocity-resolved H(\beta) data
What it does
The notebook searches for a continuum dataset that matches the timing/base of the spectral data and identifies c5100.dat as the relevant continuum.
Analysis
This is a very good and necessary step. Matching the correct continuum to the velocity-resolved H(\beta) campaign is crucial. Without that, any lag analysis could be meaningless.
This shows good awareness that not all continuum products are interchangeable.
Comment for improvement
This step should produce a formal matching report:
	•	date range overlap,
	•	number of overlapping epochs,
	•	cadence comparison,
	•	correlation of observation windows.
That would make the data pairing much more transparent.

11. Step 10: prepare consistent dataset for SURD analysis
What it does
This section aligns the continuum and velocity-resolved H(\beta) time series onto a common grid and prepares them for SURD.
Analysis
This is the bridge between data engineering and final inference. It is well motivated.
Weakness
As before, interpolation choices matter a lot. In velocity-resolved analysis, this is even more delicate because each wing/core light curve may have different effective noise and sparsity.
Comment for improvement
This section should expose all preprocessing parameters in one dictionary and save them alongside the resulting data product. That way, every SURD result has a provenance record.

12. Step 11: SURD lag scans for velocity-resolved H(\beta)
What it does
The notebook runs SURD lag scans for combinations such as:
	•	continuum + blue wing (\to) core,
	•	other predictor–target combinations across velocity bins.
Analysis
This is scientifically the most exciting inference stage in the notebook.
It is exactly the kind of setup that can distinguish:
	•	shared information between continuum and one velocity sector,
	•	unique predictive value of a wing,
	•	synergy between continuum and line subcomponents.
This is much richer than standard pairwise reverberation.
Strengths
	•	Good physical intuition in choosing targets and predictors.
	•	Extends integrated-line RM into multivariate velocity-resolved information flow.
Weaknesses
There are duplicate Step 11 blocks, which suggests notebook drift. Also, the predictor/target choices are not summarized in a single table.
Comment for improvement
This section would benefit enormously from a formal design table like:
Target
Predictor 1
Predictor 2
Physical question
That would make the notebook much easier to interpret scientifically.

13. Synthetic AGN example
What it does
The notebook creates a synthetic AGN-like dataset with irregular sampling, continuum bands, and an H(\beta)-like delayed response, then processes it using the same preparation and SURD pipeline.
Analysis
This is a very strong idea. A synthetic example is essential because it helps separate pipeline behavior from real-data ambiguity.
The synthetic model is not just decorative; it serves as a sanity check on the whole workflow.
Strengths
	•	Demonstrates end-to-end use of the pipeline.
	•	Helps understand what lag signatures SURD should recover in a controlled case.
	•	Good pedagogical value.
Weaknesses
The synthetic model is useful, but it could be more astrophysically structured. Right now it looks more like a practical validation model than a physically interpretable toy model.
Comment for improvement
I would recommend expanding the synthetic section into a mini benchmark suite:
	•	single hidden driver,
	•	redundant continuum proxies,
	•	synergistic disk/corona control,
	•	reverberation holiday toy model,
	•	changing lag/breathing BLR toy model.
That would make the notebook much more publishable as a methods study.

14. Phase 1 robustness tests
This is another major strength of the notebook.
What it does
The robustness phase includes:
	•	histogram bin sensitivity,
	•	cadence sensitivity,
	•	shuffle tests,
	•	extended lag-range checks,
	•	physical interpretation summaries.
Analysis
This is exactly what a notebook like this should contain. SURD results can depend strongly on estimator details, so robustness testing is essential.
Test A: histogram bin sensitivity
Very important because histogram-based estimators can change significantly with binning choice.
Test B: cadence sensitivity
Also crucial, especially for astronomical light curves with irregular sampling and interpolation.
Shuffle tests
Scientifically valuable because they provide null expectations.
Extended lag range
Important to check whether apparent peaks are truncated or artificial.
Strengths
This is the most methodologically mature part of the notebook. It shows the author is not blindly trusting one result.
Weaknesses
The robustness section is long, repetitive, and somewhat fragmented. The scientific intention is good, but the presentation is not yet streamlined.
Comment for improvement
This entire phase should be turned into a compact experiment framework:
	•	one function for each robustness axis,
	•	one results dictionary,
	•	one final dashboard/table.
At the moment, the same logic is repeated for core, red, and blue targets with a lot of duplication.

15. Shuffle-test helpers and target-specific shuffle analyses
What it does
The notebook defines helper functions for shuffle-based null tests and applies them separately to core, red-wing, and blue-wing targets.
Analysis
This is a scientifically strong idea. Null testing is essential to see whether synergy/leakage are genuine or expected from sampling/autocorrelation.
Strengths
	•	The notebook goes beyond descriptive plotting.
	•	It builds percentile bands from shuffled realizations.
	•	It compares real synergy curves against null envelopes.
Weaknesses
The implementation is verbose and duplicated. Also, simple shuffling can destroy autocorrelation too aggressively, which the notebook later recognizes.
Comment for improvement
This section should be consolidated and parameterized. Also, the block-shuffle/autocorrelation-preserving version should probably replace the naive version as the default.

16. Summary table generation and interpretation cells
What it does
The notebook assembles summary tables for the target analyses and interprets them in markdown.
Analysis
This is good. The notebook is trying to move from raw metrics to scientific conclusions.
Weakness
The summary-generation logic is scattered over many cells, and intermediate variable names are very state-dependent.
Comment for improvement
There should be one single final “results table” DataFrame, created in one place and saved automatically. Right now the summaries are useful but fragile.

17. Presentation export cells
What it does
The notebook regenerates key plots and copies them to a slide-figure directory.
Analysis
This is practical and shows the notebook is used in an active research workflow.
Comment for improvement
This is useful, but it should be separated from the scientific notebook into a “make figures” notebook or script. Presentation-export logic should not be mixed too heavily with analysis logic.

18. Autocorrelation-preserving null tests
What it does
The notebook adds block-shuffle tests to preserve autocorrelation better than naive shuffling.
Analysis
This is a very good improvement and arguably a more appropriate null model for AGN light curves, which are strongly autocorrelated.
This section significantly increases the scientific credibility of the null testing.
Comment for improvement
This should be elevated earlier in the notebook and described more clearly as the preferred null model. Right now it appears late, almost as an add-on, but scientifically it is very important.

19. Classical reverberation comparison: ICCF vs SURD
What it does
The notebook computes ICCF-style correlation comparisons and compares ICCF lags against SURD lags.
Analysis
This is excellent. Any new AGN timing method should be compared to classical reverberation tools.
This section gives the notebook much more scientific value because it does not isolate SURD from established practice.
Strengths
	•	Good methodological comparison.
	•	Helps interpret whether SURD is finding something new or simply echoing ICCF.
Weaknesses
ICCF is a useful baseline, but it is not enough by itself.
Comment for improvement
Add comparison, where possible, to at least one more modern RM tool or approach, for example:
	•	JAVELIN-like lag fitting,
	•	transfer-function fitting,
	•	or centroid vs peak ICCF distinction.
That would strengthen the notebook’s methodological positioning.

20. Data validation and time-axis checks
What it does
The notebook produces summary tables of light-curve properties, documents .spc filename-to-MJD conversion, plots all light curves on corrected MJD axes, and saves summary tables.
Analysis
This is a very important late-stage quality-control section. It shows awareness that time-axis errors can destroy reverberation inference.
That is excellent.
Comment for improvement
This validation section is so important that part of it should move much earlier, before the main SURD interpretation. Timing integrity should be established before the main scientific conclusions are drawn.

21. Main scientific strengths of the notebook
Here are the strongest aspects overall:
1. It tackles a real astrophysical problem
This is not a generic coding exercise. The notebook addresses AGN reverberation mapping with a genuinely interesting multivariate information-decomposition method.
2. It goes beyond integrated-light-curve analysis
The velocity-resolved H(\beta) work is particularly valuable.
3. It includes robustness analysis
That makes the results much more credible.
4. It includes null tests
This is essential and well chosen.
5. It compares against a classical method
The ICCF comparison is a strong feature.

22. Main weaknesses of the notebook
These are the biggest issues that should be improved.
1. Hard-coded paths everywhere
This is the single biggest practical weakness.
2. Too much cell-state dependence
Many cells assume previous cells have already run successfully.
3. Duplicate and repeated code
Especially in Step 11 and the shuffle sections.
4. Weak modularization
Key workflows should be functions or modules, not long linear notebook fragments.
5. Limited provenance tracking
Preprocessing and analysis parameter choices are not gathered centrally.
6. Scientific assumptions need clearer documentation
Especially interpolation, binning, and spectral processing assumptions.

23. Best improvement plan
If I were improving this notebook for publication or collaboration, I would do the following.
First priority
Create a configuration section with all paths and analysis parameters.
Second priority
Refactor all repeated workflows into functions:
	•	load data,
	•	prepare time series,
	•	run SURD scan,
	•	run shuffle/block-shuffle tests,
	•	summarize peaks,
	•	plot results.
Third priority
Create a single results object or dictionary that stores:
	•	target,
	•	predictors,
	•	preprocessing settings,
	•	SURD settings,
	•	lag range,
	•	peak metrics,
	•	null-test outcomes.
Fourth priority
Separate the notebook into three notebooks or modules:
	1	data preparation,
	2	main SURD analysis,
	3	robustness and figures.
Fifth priority
Add formal validation markdown:
	•	interpolation assumptions,
	•	spectral bin definitions,
	•	timing conversion assumptions,
	•	meaning of each SURD component.

Final verdict
This notebook is scientifically ambitious and promising. Its best parts are the velocity-resolved H(\beta) construction, the SURD lag-scan logic, the robustness tests, and the ICCF comparison. It clearly contains research value.
Its main limitation is not the scientific idea, but the engineering maturity of the analysis. Right now it is a strong exploratory research notebook. With refactoring, clearer provenance, and reduced duplication, it could become a very solid reproducible analysis framework and possibly the backbone of a paper.
Send the next notebook and I’ll review it in the same way.

